samples/S12.MedTrials/README.md, before:

# S12.MedTrials - Clinical Trial Operations Copilot

S12.MedTrials demonstrates how Koan's AI and MCP pillars combine to deliver an agent-ready clinical operations service. The sample exposes REST APIs, Model Context Protocol tooling, and an AngularJS single-page app so coordinators can plan participant visits, query protocol guidance, and monitor safety issues with the same orchestrations.

## Highlights

- **Entity-first domain** – `TrialSite`, `ParticipantVisit`, `ProtocolDocument`, `AdverseEventReport`, and `MonitoringNote` are plain Koan entities annotated with `McpEntityAttribute` to expose CRUD tools automatically.
- **AI-powered workflows** – Services use graceful degradation patterns: embeddings and chat requests resolve via `Ai.TryResolve()`, degrade gracefully when no provider/vector store is configured, and fall back to deterministic heuristics.
- **Planner + digest endpoints** – `POST /participant-visits/plan-adjustments` proposes schedule changes while `POST /adverse-event-reports/summarise` assembles safety digests that agents or humans can review.
- **AngularJS SPA** – Served from the API project's `wwwroot` with Bootstrap styling, route-based controllers, and Koan REST integrations.
- **Seeded data** – A hosted worker seeds demo sites, visits, documents, and adverse events so the UI and APIs light up immediately after `dotnet run`.
- **Dedicated MCP host** – `S12.MedTrials.McpService` runs as a standalone HTTP+SSE transport with zero-config development settings and a capability probe wired into the primary API.

## Running the sample

### Option 1: Docker Compose (Recommended)

The easiest way to run S12.MedTrials with all dependencies (MongoDB, Weaviate, Ollama) and the dedicated MCP transport:

```bash
# From the S12.MedTrials directory:
.\start.bat
```

This script builds the Docker images, starts all services (API, MCP transport, MongoDB, Weaviate, Ollama), waits for the API to be ready, and opens your browser to `http://localhost:5110`.

**Service Ports:**
- API: `http://localhost:5110`
- MCP HTTP+SSE: `http://localhost:5114` (stream endpoint: `/mcp/sse`, RPC endpoint: `/mcp/rpc`)
- MongoDB: `localhost:5111` (mapped to container port 27017)
- Weaviate: `http://localhost:5112` (mapped to container port 8080)
- Ollama: `http://localhost:5113` (mapped to container port 11434)

**Data Persistence:**
All service data is stored in `./data/` subdirectories (mongo, weaviate, ollama-models) for persistence across container restarts.

### Option 2: Local Development

```bash
# Terminal 1 – primary API
dotnet run --project samples/S12.MedTrials/S12.MedTrials.csproj

# Terminal 2 – MCP HTTP+SSE transport
dotnet run --project samples/S12.MedTrials.McpService/S12.MedTrials.McpService.csproj
```

The API listens on `http://localhost:5110` (see `AppManifest`). Swagger UI and the SPA are hosted by the same project, while the MCP transport exposes SSE on port `5114`:

- Swagger: `http://localhost:5110/swagger`
- SPA: `http://localhost:5110/index.html`
- MCP HTTP+SSE: `http://localhost:5114/mcp`

**Note:** When running locally, ensure MongoDB, Weaviate, and Ollama are running separately on the ports configured in `appsettings.Development.json`.

## Key endpoints

| Method | Endpoint | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `POST` | `/api/protocol-documents/ingest` | Store protocol or monitoring content; generates embeddings when available. |
| `POST` | `/api/protocol-documents/search` | Semantic or deterministic search across stored documents. |
| `POST` | `/api/participant-visits/plan-adjustments` | Runs the visit planner, persists proposed adjustments, and returns diagnostics. |
| `POST` | `/api/adverse-event-reports/summarise` | Produces an adverse-event digest, falling back to deterministic summaries if AI is unavailable. |

## MCP integration

All entities are decorated with `McpEntityAttribute`, so Koan automatically exposes matching Model Context Protocol tools. The planner and digest endpoints reuse the same services that the MCP transport invokes through `EndpointToolExecutor`, ensuring parity between REST clients and IDE/agent tooling. HTTP+SSE tooling now runs in the dedicated `S12.MedTrials.McpService` project on port `5114` with:

- Opt-in HTTP+SSE transport (`Koan:Mcp:EnableHttpSseTransport: true`)
- CORS for local hosts (`http://localhost:5110`, `http://localhost:4200`, `http://localhost:5114`)
- A published capability document at `/mcp/capabilities`
- Development-friendly anonymous mode (`RequireAuthentication: false`) that can be hardened via configuration

The primary API reads `S12:MedTrials:Mcp` options to discover the MCP base URL and ships a background probe that fetches `/mcp/capabilities` on a timer, surfacing the tool count and connectivity in logs. When running in Docker the API automatically targets the `mcp` container over the internal network.

### Requesting development tokens

The MCP host honours the same OAuth test provider used by the API. Tokens are optional in development but required once `RequireAuthentication` is enabled. To request a bearer token with the default client credentials flow:

```bash
curl -s -X POST "http://localhost:5110/.testoauth/token" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded" \
  -d "grant_type=client_credentials&client_id=s12-medtrials-spa&client_secret=dev-secret-s12-medtrials-spa&scope=clinical:operations"
```

With a token in hand you can connect to the SSE stream or call JSON-RPC endpoints directly:

```bash
# Stream capabilities/events
curl -N "http://localhost:5114/mcp/sse" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
  -H "Accept: text/event-stream"

# Invoke a tool over JSON-RPC
curl -s "http://localhost:5114/mcp/rpc" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":"1","method":"tools/list"}'
```

## Configuration

- `appsettings.json` ships Ollama defaults (`all-minilm`) so embeddings can run locally when Ollama is installed.
- `appsettings.Development.json` configures MongoDB, Weaviate, Ollama, and Koan's JWT test provider for local experimentation.
- `S12:MedTrials:Mcp` settings point the API at the MCP transport and control the internal capability probe interval.
- `samples/S12.MedTrials.McpService/appsettings*.json` enable HTTP+SSE, development CORS, and anonymous access for the dedicated MCP host.
- Vector storage is optional. When `Vector<ProtocolDocument>.IsAvailable` returns `false`, the sample falls back to deterministic search and records diagnostics for MCP clients.

## Next steps

- Extend parity tests to assert that MCP tooling returns the same diagnostics as REST endpoints.
- Add streaming chat UX to surface planner reasoning in the SPA.
- Wire additional AI providers (Azure/OpenAI) through configuration to demonstrate multi-provider routing.

Commit message:

Add MCP web console for S12 MedTrials

samples/S12.MedTrials/README.md, after:

# S12.MedTrials - Clinical Trial Operations Copilot

S12.MedTrials demonstrates how Koan's AI and MCP pillars combine to deliver an agent-ready clinical operations service. The sample exposes REST APIs, Model Context Protocol tooling, and an AngularJS single-page app so coordinators can plan participant visits, query protocol guidance, and monitor safety issues with the same orchestrations.

## Highlights

- **Entity-first domain** – `TrialSite`, `ParticipantVisit`, `ProtocolDocument`, `AdverseEventReport`, and `MonitoringNote` are plain Koan entities annotated with `McpEntityAttribute` to expose CRUD tools automatically.
- **AI-powered workflows** – Services use graceful degradation patterns: embeddings and chat requests resolve via `Ai.TryResolve()`, degrade gracefully when no provider/vector store is configured, and fall back to deterministic heuristics.
- **Planner + digest endpoints** – `POST /participant-visits/plan-adjustments` proposes schedule changes while `POST /adverse-event-reports/summarise` assembles safety digests that agents or humans can review.
- **AngularJS SPA** – Served from the API project's `wwwroot` with Bootstrap styling, route-based controllers, and Koan REST integrations.
- **Seeded data** – A hosted worker seeds demo sites, visits, documents, and adverse events so the UI and APIs light up immediately after `dotnet run`.
- **Dedicated MCP host** – `S12.MedTrials.McpService` runs as a standalone HTTP+SSE transport with zero-config development settings and a capability probe wired into the primary API.
- **MCP console** – `S12.MedTrials.McpService/wwwroot` ships an AngularJS client to inspect capabilities, browse tool schemas, and execute JSON-RPC calls over the live session.

## Running the sample

### Option 1: Docker Compose (Recommended)

The easiest way to run S12.MedTrials with all dependencies (MongoDB, Weaviate, Ollama) and the dedicated MCP transport:

```bash
# From the S12.MedTrials directory:
.\start.bat
```

This script builds the Docker images, starts all services (API, MCP transport, MongoDB, Weaviate, Ollama), waits for the API to be ready, and opens your browser to `http://localhost:5110`.

**Service Ports:**
- API: `http://localhost:5110`
- MCP HTTP+SSE: `http://localhost:5114` (stream endpoint: `/mcp/sse`, RPC endpoint: `/mcp/rpc`)
- MongoDB: `localhost:5111` (mapped to container port 27017)
- Weaviate: `http://localhost:5112` (mapped to container port 8080)
- Ollama: `http://localhost:5113` (mapped to container port 11434)

**Data Persistence:**
All service data is stored in `./data/` subdirectories (mongo, weaviate, ollama-models) for persistence across container restarts.

### Option 2: Local Development

```bash
# Terminal 1 – primary API
dotnet run --project samples/S12.MedTrials/S12.MedTrials.csproj

# Terminal 2 – MCP HTTP+SSE transport
dotnet run --project samples/S12.MedTrials.McpService/S12.MedTrials.McpService.csproj
```

The API listens on `http://localhost:5110` (see `AppManifest`). Swagger UI and the SPA are hosted by the same project, while the MCP transport exposes SSE on port `5114`:

- Swagger: `http://localhost:5110/swagger`
- SPA: `http://localhost:5110/index.html`
- MCP HTTP+SSE: `http://localhost:5114/mcp`
- MCP Console: `http://localhost:5114/index.html`

**Note:** When running locally, ensure MongoDB, Weaviate, and Ollama are running separately on the ports configured in `appsettings.Development.json`.

## Key endpoints

| Method | Endpoint | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `POST` | `/api/protocol-documents/ingest` | Store protocol or monitoring content; generates embeddings when available. |
| `POST` | `/api/protocol-documents/search` | Semantic or deterministic search across stored documents. |
| `POST` | `/api/participant-visits/plan-adjustments` | Runs the visit planner, persists proposed adjustments, and returns diagnostics. |
| `POST` | `/api/adverse-event-reports/summarise` | Produces an adverse-event digest, falling back to deterministic summaries if AI is unavailable. |

## MCP integration

All entities are decorated with `McpEntityAttribute`, so Koan automatically exposes matching Model Context Protocol tools. The planner and digest endpoints reuse the same services that the MCP transport invokes through `EndpointToolExecutor`, ensuring parity between REST clients and IDE/agent tooling. HTTP+SSE tooling now runs in the dedicated `S12.MedTrials.McpService` project on port `5114` with:

- Opt-in HTTP+SSE transport (`Koan:Mcp:EnableHttpSseTransport: true`)
- CORS for local hosts (`http://localhost:5110`, `http://localhost:4200`, `http://localhost:5114`)
- A published capability document at `/mcp/capabilities`
- Development-friendly anonymous mode (`RequireAuthentication: false`) that can be hardened via configuration

The primary API reads `S12:MedTrials:Mcp` options to discover the MCP base URL and ships a background probe that fetches `/mcp/capabilities` on a timer, surfacing the tool count and connectivity in logs. When running in Docker the API automatically targets the `mcp` container over the internal network.

### Requesting development tokens

The MCP host honours the same OAuth test provider used by the API. Tokens are optional in development but required once `RequireAuthentication` is enabled. To request a bearer token with the default client credentials flow:

```bash
curl -s -X POST "http://localhost:5110/.testoauth/token" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded" \
  -d "grant_type=client_credentials&client_id=s12-medtrials-spa&client_secret=dev-secret-s12-medtrials-spa&scope=clinical:operations"
```

With a token in hand you can connect to the SSE stream or call JSON-RPC endpoints directly:

```bash
# Stream capabilities/events
curl -N "http://localhost:5114/mcp/sse" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
  -H "Accept: text/event-stream"

# Invoke a tool over JSON-RPC
curl -s "http://localhost:5114/mcp/rpc" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":"1","method":"tools/list"}'
```

## Configuration

- `appsettings.json` ships Ollama defaults (`all-minilm`) so embeddings can run locally when Ollama is installed.
- `appsettings.Development.json` configures MongoDB, Weaviate, Ollama, and Koan's JWT test provider for local experimentation.
- `S12:MedTrials:Mcp` settings point the API at the MCP transport and control the internal capability probe interval.
- `samples/S12.MedTrials.McpService/appsettings*.json` enable HTTP+SSE, development CORS, and anonymous access for the dedicated MCP host.
- Vector storage is optional. When `Vector<ProtocolDocument>.IsAvailable` returns `false`, the sample falls back to deterministic search and records diagnostics for MCP clients.

## Next steps

- Extend parity tests to assert that MCP tooling returns the same diagnostics as REST endpoints.
- Add streaming chat UX to surface planner reasoning in the SPA.
- Wire additional AI providers (Azure/OpenAI) through configuration to demonstrate multi-provider routing.
