docs/decisions/OPS-0014-samples-port-allocation.md, before:

---
id: OPS-0014
slug: OPS-0014-samples-port-allocation
domain: OPS
status: Accepted
date: 2025-08-17
title: Samples port allocation scheme
---
 
# ADR-0014: Samples port allocation scheme

## Context
Common ports like 5000/8080/27017 often collide with local services. We want predictable, low-conflict ports for all Koan samples, across local runs and compose.

## Decision
Reserve contiguous blocks of 10 ports per sample starting at 5034 (visual hint to “Koan”). The first port in each block is the app’s HTTP binding. Internal container ports mirror the external choice for clarity.

- Range start: 5034
- Block size: 10 per sample
- Assignments (initial):
  - S1: 5044 (block 5040–5049). HTTP binds to 5044.
  - S2: 5054 (block 5050–5059). HTTP binds to 5054. Mongo is addressed by service name in compose (no host port mapping).
  - S5: 5084 (block 5080–5089). HTTP binds to 5084.
  - Future samples: increment the block (S3 → 5060–5069, S4 → 5070–5079, ...).

## Consequences
- Lower chance of conflicts with common dev ports.
- Easy mental model: sample N tends to use 50(40+N)4 as the app port.
- Compose files avoid binding database service ports on the host by default. Connection strings target service names within the compose network.

Note: For developer inspection and demos, samples MAY optionally expose database/vector/aux ports on the host using free ports from within the same block (e.g., S5 → 5081 for Mongo, 5082 for Weaviate, 5083 for Ollama). This is a usability choice and not required in production.

## Implementation notes
- Scripts and Dockerfiles updated to the new ports.
- Compose files map host:container with the reserved ports for APIs; DB services remain internal.
- Documentation updated in sample READMEs and this ADR.
 - When inspection is desired, expose infra ports explicitly in compose using the sample block (e.g., 5081–5083 for S5) and keep data directories host-mounted under the sample’s `data/` folder for easy backup.

Commit message:

feat(samples): S6.SnapVault professional photo management with framework fixes
Implements complete S6.SnapVault sample demonstrating:
- Multi-tier storage architecture (hot/warm/cold with automatic tiering)
- Semantic photo search via Weaviate + Ollama embeddings
- Fluent media transform API (DX-0047) for image derivatives
- EXIF metadata extraction and AI-powered auto-tagging
- Advanced UX with bulk operations, filters, and keyboard shortcuts

Framework bug fixes:
- fix(storage): preserve Entity<T> GUID v7 IDs in StorageEntity.From()/To()
  Previously overwrote auto-generated IDs with storage paths, causing
  nested storage keys and broken media URLs
- fix(weaviate): use vector provider naming instead of data provider
  WeaviateVectorRepository now correctly resolves "weaviate" naming
  conventions with FullNamespace style for dotted class names

Implements DX-0047 Fluent Media Transform API:
- Chainable stream transforms (resize, crop, orient, format conversion)
- Branch() for parallel derivative generation from single source
- Automatic disposal and memory management
- Integration with MediaEntity<T> for seamless storage

Testing:
- Media transform unit tests with test image generation
- Storage provider configuration validation tests
- End-to-end photo upload and retrieval verification

docs/decisions/OPS-0014-samples-port-allocation.md, after:

---
id: OPS-0014
slug: OPS-0014-samples-port-allocation
domain: OPS
status: Accepted
date: 2025-08-17
title: Samples port allocation scheme
---
 
# ADR-0014: Samples port allocation scheme

## Context
Common ports like 5000/8080/27017 often collide with local services. We want predictable, low-conflict ports for all Koan samples, across local runs and compose.

## Decision
Reserve contiguous blocks of 10 ports per sample starting at 5034 (visual hint to “Koan”). The first port in each block is the app’s HTTP binding. Internal container ports mirror the external choice for clarity.

- Range start: 5034
- Block size: 10 per sample
- Assignments:
  - S0: 5034 (block 5034–5039). Console app, no HTTP.
  - S1: 5044 (block 5040–5049). HTTP binds to 5044.
  - S2: 5054 (block 5050–5059). ~~ARCHIVED~~ - freed for future use.
  - S3: 5064 (block 5060–5069). Reserved for S3.NotifyHub.
  - S4: 5074 (block 5070–5079). ~~ARCHIVED (S4.Web)~~ - Reserved for S4.DevHub.
  - S5: 5084 (block 5080–5089). HTTP binds to 5084 (S5.Recs).
  - S6: 5094 (block 5090–5099). ~~ARCHIVED (S6.Auth, S6.SocialCreator)~~ - Reserved for S6.MediaHub.
  - S7: 5104 (block 5100–5109). Reserved for S7.DocPlatform (merged S7.TechDocs + S7.ContentPlatform).
  - S8: 5114 (block 5110–5119). HTTP binds to 5114 (S8.Canon).
  - S9: 5124 (block 5120–5129). Reserved for S9.OrderFlow.
  - S10: 5134 (block 5130–5139). HTTP binds to 5134 (S10.DevPortal).
  - S12: 5154 (block 5150–5159). ~~ARCHIVED~~
  - S14: 5174 (block 5170–5179). HTTP binds to 5174 (S14.AdapterBench).
  - S15: 5184 (block 5180–5189). ~~ARCHIVED~~
  - S16: 5194 (block 5190–5199). HTTP binds to 5194 (S16.PantryPal).

## Consequences
- Lower chance of conflicts with common dev ports.
- Easy mental model: sample N tends to use 50(40+N)4 as the app port.
- Compose files avoid binding database service ports on the host by default. Connection strings target service names within the compose network.

Note: For developer inspection and demos, samples MAY optionally expose database/vector/aux ports on the host using free ports from within the same block (e.g., S5 → 5081 for Mongo, 5082 for Weaviate, 5083 for Ollama). This is a usability choice and not required in production.

## Implementation notes
- Scripts and Dockerfiles updated to the new ports.
- Compose files map host:container with the reserved ports for APIs; DB services remain internal.
- Documentation updated in sample READMEs and this ADR.
 - When inspection is desired, expose infra ports explicitly in compose using the sample block (e.g., 5081–5083 for S5) and keep data directories host-mounted under the sample’s `data/` folder for easy backup.
